monster that the great Goddess of Chaos could produce, in her most vengeful
and destructive moments.
58 After drawing conclusions such as that, how could
we not question the value of our being, and even of Being itself? Who then could
be faced with illness, in himself or another, without doubting the moral utility of
prescribing a healing medicament? And no one understands the darkness of the
individual better than the individual himself. Who, then, when ill, is going to be
fully committed to his own care?

Perhaps Man is something that should never have been. Perhaps the world
should even be cleansed of all human presence, so that Being and consciousness
could return to the innocent brutality of the animal. I believe that the person who
claims never to have wished for such a thing has neither consulted his memory
nor confronted his darkest fantasies. What then is to be done?

A Spark of the Divine

In Genesis 1, God creates the world with the divine, truthful Word, generating
habitable, paradisal order from the precosmogonic chaos. He then creates Man
and Woman in His Image, imbuing them with the capacity to do the same—to
create order from chaos, and continue His work. At each stage of creation,
including that involving the formation of the first couple, God reflects upon what
has come to be, and pronounces it Good.

The juxtaposition of Genesis 1 with Genesis 2 & 3 (the latter two chapters
outlining the fall of man, describing why our lot is so tragedy-ridden and
ethically torturous) produces a narrative sequence almost unbearable in its
profundity. The moral of Genesis 1 is that Being brought into existence through
true speech is Good. This is true even of man himself, prior to his separation
from God. This goodness is terribly disrupted by the events of the fall (and of
Cain and Abel and the Flood and the Tower of Babel), but we retain an
intimation of the prelapsarian state. We remember, so to speak. We remain
eternally nostalgic for the innocence of childhood, the divine, unconscious Being
of the animal, and the untouched cathedral-like old-growth forest. We find
respite in such things. We worship them, even if we are self-proclaimed atheistic
environmentalists of the most anti-human sort. The original state of Nature,
conceived in this manner, is paradisal. But we are no longer one with God and
Nature, and there is no simple turning back.

The original Man and Woman, existing in unbroken unity with their Creator,
did not appear conscious (and certainly not self-conscious). Their eyes were not
open. But, in their perfection, they were also less, not more, than their post-Fall
counterparts. Their goodness was something bestowed, rather than deserved or
earned. They exercised no choice. God knows, that’s easier. But maybe it’s not
better than, for example, goodness genuinely earned. Maybe, even in some
cosmic sense (assuming that consciousness itself is a phenomenon of cosmic
significance), free choice matters. Who can speak with certainty about such
things? I am unwilling to take these questions off the table, however, merely
because they are difficult. So, here’s a proposition: perhaps it is not simply the
emergence of self-consciousness and the rise of our moral knowledge of Death
and the Fall that besets us and makes us doubt our own worth. Perhaps it is
instead our unwillingness—reflected in Adam’s shamed hiding—to walk with
God, despite our fragility and propensity for evil.

The entire Bible is structured so that everything after the Fall—the history of
Israel, the prophets, the coming of Christ—is presented as a remedy for that Fall,
a way out of evil. The beginning of conscious history, the rise of the state and all
its pathologies of pride and rigidity, the emergence of great moral figures who
try to set things right, culminating in the Messiah Himself—that is all part of
humanity’s attempt, God willing, to set itself right. And what would that mean?
And this is an amazing thing: the answer is already implicit in Genesis 1: to
embody the Image of God—to speak out of chaos the Being that is Good—but to
do so consciously, of our own free choice. Back is the way forward—as T. S.
Eliot so rightly insisted—but back as awake beings, exercising the proper choice
of awake beings, instead of back to sleep:

We shall not cease from exploration
And the end of all our exploring
Will be to arrive where we started
And know the place for the first time.
Through the unknown, remembered gate
When the last of earth left to discover
Is that which was the beginning;
At the source of the longest river
The voice of the hidden waterfall
And the children in the apple-tree
Not known, because not looked for
But heard, half-heard, in the stillness
Between two waves of the sea.
Quick now, here, now, always—
A condition of complete simplicity
(Costing not less than everything)
And all shall be well and
All manner of things shall be well
When the tongues of flames are in-folded
Into the crowned knot of fire
And the fire and the rose are one.
(“Little Gidding,” Four Quartets, 1943)

If we wish to take care of ourselves properly, we would have to respect ourselves
—but we don’t, because we are—not least in our own eyes—fallen creatures. If
we lived in Truth; if we spoke the Truth—then we could walk with God once
again, and respect ourselves, and others, and the world. Then we might treat
ourselves like people we cared for. We might strive to set the world straight. We
might orient it toward Heaven, where we would want people we cared for to
dwell, instead of Hell, where our resentment and hatred would eternally sentence
everyone.

In the areas where Christianity emerged two thousand years ago, people were
much more barbaric than they are today. Conflict was everywhere. Human
sacrifice, including that of children, was a common occurrence even in
technologically sophisticated societies, such as that of ancient Carthage.
59
In
Rome, arena sports were competitions to the death, and the spilling of blood was
a commonplace. The probability that a modern person, in a functional
democratic country, will now kill or be killed is infinitesimally low compared to
what it was in previous societies (and still is, in the unorganized and anarchic
parts of the world).
60 Then, the primary moral issue confronting society was
control of violent, impulsive selfishness and the mindless greed and brutality that
accompanies it. People with those aggressive tendencies still exist. At least now
they know that such behaviour is sub-optimal, and either try to control it or
encounter major social obstacles if they don’t.

But now, also, another problem has arisen, which was perhaps less common in
our harsher past. It is easy to believe that people are arrogant, and egotistical,
and always looking out for themselves. The cynicism that makes that opinion a
universal truism is widespread and fashionable. But such an orientation to the
world is not at all characteristic of many people. They have the opposite
problem: they shoulder intolerable burdens of self-disgust, self-contempt, shame
and self-consciousness. Thus, instead of narcissistically inflating their own
importance, they don’t value themselves at all, and they don’t take care of
themselves with attention and skill. It seems that people often don’t really
believe that they deserve the best care, personally speaking. They are
excruciatingly aware of their own faults and inadequacies, real and exaggerated,
and ashamed and doubtful of their own value. They believe that other people
shouldn’t suffer, and they will work diligently and altruistically to help them
alleviate it. They extend the same courtesy even to the animals they are
acquainted with—but not so easily to themselves.

It is true that the idea of virtuous self-sacrifice is deeply embedded in Western
culture (at least insofar as the West has been influenced by Christianity, which is
based on the imitation of someone who performed the ultimate act of selfsacrifice). Any claim that the Golden Rule does not mean “sacrifice yourself for
others” might therefore appear dubious. But Christ’s archetypal death exists as
an example of how to accept finitude, betrayal and tyranny heroically—how to
walk with God despite the tragedy of self-conscious knowledge—and not as a
directive to victimize ourselves in the service of others. To sacrifice ourselves to
God (to the highest good, if you like) does not mean to suffer silently and
willingly when some person or organization demands more from us,
consistently, than is offered in return. That means we are supporting tyranny, and
allowing ourselves to be treated like slaves. It is not virtuous to be victimized by
a bully, even if that bully is oneself.

I learned two very important lessons from Carl Jung, the famous Swiss depth
psychologist, about “doing unto others as you would have them do unto you” or
“loving your neighbour as yourself.” The first lesson was that neither of these
statements has anything to do with being nice. The second was that both are
equations, rather than injunctions. If I am someone’s friend, family member, or
lover, then I am morally obliged to bargain as hard on my own behalf as they are
on theirs. If I fail to do so, I will end up a slave, and the other person a tyrant.
What good is that? It much better for any relationship when both partners are
strong. Furthermore, there is little difference between standing up and speaking
for yourself, when you are being bullied or otherwise tormented and enslaved,
and standing up and speaking for someone else. As Jung points out, this means
embracing and loving the sinner who is yourself, as much as forgiving and
aiding someone else who is stumbling and imperfect.

As God himself claims (so goes the story), “Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord.” According to this philosophy, you do not simply belong to
yourself. You are not simply your own possession to torture and mistreat. This is
partly because your Being is inexorably tied up with that of others, and your
mistreatment of yourself can have catastrophic consequences for others. This is
most clearly evident, perhaps, in the aftermath of suicide, when those left behind
are often both bereft and traumatized. But, metaphorically speaking, there is also
this: you have a spark of the divine in you, which belongs not to you, but to God.
We are, after all—according to Genesis—made in His image. We have the semidivine capacity for consciousness. Our consciousness participates in the
speaking forth of Being. We are low-resolution (“kenotic”) versions of God. We
can make order from chaos—and vice versa—in our way, with our words. So,
we may not exactly be God, but we’re not exactly nothing, either.

In my own periods of darkness, in the underworld of the soul, I find myself
frequently overcome and amazed by the ability of people to befriend each other,
to love their intimate partners and parents and children, and to do what they must
do to keep the machinery of the world running. I knew a man, injured and
disabled by a car accident, who was employed by a local utility. For years after
the crash he worked side by side with another man, who for his part suffered
with a degenerative neurological disease. They cooperated while repairing the
lines, each making up for the other’s inadequacy. This sort of everyday heroism
is the rule, I believe, rather than the exception. Most individuals are dealing with
one or more serious health problems while going productively and
uncomplainingly about their business. If anyone is fortunate enough to be in a
rare period of grace and health, personally, then he or she typically has at least
one close family member in crisis. Yet people prevail and continue to do difficult
and effortful tasks to hold themselves and their families and society together. To
me this is miraculous—so much so that a dumbfounded gratitude is the only
appropriate response. There are so many ways that things can fall apart, or fail to
work altogether, and it is always wounded people who are holding it together.
They deserve some genuine and heartfelt admiration for that. It’s an ongoing
miracle of fortitude and perseverance.

In my clinical practice I encourage people to credit themselves and those
around them for acting productively and with care, as well as for the genuine
concern and thoughtfulness they manifest towards others. People are so tortured
by the limitations and constraint of Being that I am amazed they ever act
properly or look beyond themselves at all. But enough do so that we have central
heat and running water and infinite computational power and electricity and
enough for everyone to eat and even the capacity to contemplate the fate of
broader society and nature, terrible nature, itself. All that complex machinery
that protects us from freezing and starving and dying from lack of water tends
unceasingly towards malfunction through entropy, and it is only the constant
attention of careful people that keeps it working so unbelievably well. Some
people degenerate into the hell of resentment and the hatred of Being, but most
refuse to do so, despite their suffering and disappointments and losses and
inadequacies and ugliness, and again that is a miracle for those with the eyes to
see it.

Humanity, in toto, and those who compose it as identifiable people deserve
some sympathy for the appalling burden under which the human individual
genuinely staggers; some sympathy for subjugation to mortal vulnerability,
tyranny of the state, and the depredations of nature. It is an existential situation
that no mere animal encounters or endures, and one of severity such that it
would take a God to fully bear it. It is this sympathy that should be the proper
medicament for self-conscious self-contempt, which has its justification, but is
only half the full and proper story. Hatred for self and mankind must be balanced
with gratefulness for tradition and the state and astonishment at what normal,
everyday people accomplish—to say nothing of the staggering achievements of
the truly remarkable.

We deserve some respect. You deserve some respect. You are important to
other people, as much as to yourself. You have some vital role to play in the
unfolding destiny of the world. You are, therefore, morally obliged to take care
of yourself. You should take care of, help and be good to yourself the same way
you would take care of, help and be good to someone you loved and valued. You
may therefore have to conduct yourself habitually in a manner that allows you
some respect for your own Being—and fair enough. But every person is deeply
flawed. Everyone falls short of the glory of God. If that stark fact meant,
however, that we had no responsibility to care, for ourselves as much as others,
everyone would be brutally punished all the time. That would not be good. That
would make the shortcomings of the world, which can make everyone who
thinks honestly question the very propriety of the world, worse in every way.
That simply cannot be the proper path forward.

To treat yourself as if you were someone you are responsible for helping is,
instead, to consider what would be truly good for you. This is not “what you
want.” It is also not “what would make you happy.” Every time you give a child
something sweet, you make that child happy. That does not mean that you
should do nothing for children except feed them candy. “Happy” is by no means
synonymous with “good.” You must get children to brush their teeth. They must
put on their snowsuits when they go outside in the cold, even though they might
object strenuously. You must help a child become a virtuous, responsible, awake
being, capable of full reciprocity—able to take care of himself and others, and to
thrive while doing so. Why would you think it acceptable to do anything less for
yourself?

You need to consider the future and think, “What might my life look like if I
were caring for myself properly? What career would challenge me and render
me productive and helpful, so that I could shoulder my share of the load, and
enjoy the consequences? What should I be doing, when I have some freedom, to
improve my health, expand my knowledge, and strengthen my body?” You need
to know where you are, so you can start to chart your course. You need to know
who you are, so that you understand your armament and bolster yourself in
respect to your limitations. You need to know where you are going, so that you
can limit the extent of chaos in your life, restructure order, and bring the divine
force of Hope to bear on the world.

You must determine where you are going, so that you can bargain for yourself,
so that you don’t end up resentful, vengeful and cruel. You have to articulate
your own principles, so that you can defend yourself against others’ taking
inappropriate advantage of you, and so that you are secure and safe while you
work and play. You must discipline yourself carefully. You must keep the
promises you make to yourself, and reward yourself, so that you can trust and
motivate yourself. You need to determine how to act toward yourself so that you
are most likely to become and to stay a good person. It would be good to make
the world a better place. Heaven, after all, will not arrive of its own accord. We
will have to work to bring it about, and strengthen ourselves, so that we can
withstand the deadly angels and flaming sword of judgment that God used to bar
its entrance.

Don’t underestimate the power of vision and direction. These are irresistible
forces, able to transform what might appear to be unconquerable obstacles into
traversable pathways and expanding opportunities. Strengthen the individual.
Start with yourself. Take care with yourself. Define who you are. Refine your
personality. Choose your destination and articulate your Being. As the great
nineteenth-century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche so brilliantly noted,
“He whose life has a why can bear almost any how.”
61
You could help direct the world, on its careening trajectory, a bit more toward
Heaven and a bit more away from Hell. Once having understood Hell,
researched it, so to speak—particularly your own individual Hell—you could
decide against going there or creating that. You could aim elsewhere